specs for p2p header exchange (#1209)
rollkit/rollkit: specs/src/specs/header-sync.md

# P2P Header Sync

## Abstract

> The P2P Header Sync is a p2pP exchange service for rollkit headers that implements the go-header interface. The main components are:

Reviewer: i'd link to the go header repo. We can use re-useable markdown links to keep the specs easier to read, like so

```suggestion
The P2P Header Sync is a p2pP exchange service for rollkit headers that implements the [go-header][go-header] interface. The main components are:
```

at the bottom of the file
```
[go-header]: https://github.com/celestiaorg/go-header
```

* store: a `headerEx` prefixed datastore where synced headers are stored
* subscriber: a libp2p node pubsub subscriber
* p2p server: a server for handling header requests between peers in the p2p network
* exchange: a client that enables sending in/out-bound header requests from/to the p2p network
* syncer: a service for efficient synchronization for headers. When a p2p node falls behind and wants to catch up to the latest network head via p2p network, it can use the syncer.

## Details

All three types of nodes (sequencer, full, and light) run the P2P header exchange service to maintain the cannonical view of the rollup chain (with respect to the p2p network).

The header exchange service inherits the ConnectionGater from the node's p2p client which allows blocking and allowing peers as needed by specifying the `P2PConfig.BlockedPeers` and `P2PConfig.AllowedPeers`.

`NodeConfig.BlockTime` is used to configure the syncer such that it can effectively decide the outdated headers while it receives headers from the p2p network.

> Both header and block sync utilizes go-header library and runs two separate exchange services (p2p header sync and p2p block sync). This distinction is mainly to serve light nodes which does not store blocks, but only headers synced from the p2p network. The two separate service may be redundant for the full nodes and can be optimized to single service in the future.

Reviewer: Question to the team, do we want to include references to future optimizations in the spec? personally I don't think we should because it makes it harder to maintain when thinking about what the trigger would be to update the specs for any potential future case. It is better to keep them focused on current state only.

Open to discussion.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, think it's better to focus on current state

Author: sounds good.

## Assumptions

* The header exchange store is created by prefixing `headerEx` the main datastore.
* The genesis `ChainID` is used to create the `PubsubTopicID` in go-header. For example, for ChainID `gm`, the pubsub topic id is `/gm/header-sub/v0.0.1`. Refer to go-header specs for further details.
* The header store must be initialized with genesis header before starting the syncer service. The genesis header can be loaded by passing the genesis header hash via `NodeConfig.TrustedHash` configuration parameter or by querying the p2p network. This imposes a time constraint that full/light nodes have to wait for the aggregator to publish the genesis header before starting the p2p header exchange service.
* The P2P Header sync works only when the node is connected to p2p network by specifying the initial seeds to connect to via `P2PConfig.Seeds` configuration parameter.
* Node's context is passed down to all the components of the p2p header exchange to control shutting down the service either abruptly (in case of failure) or gracefully (during successful scenarios).

## Implementation

> The P2P header exchange implementation can be found in [node/header_exchange.go](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/header_exchange.go). The full and light nodes create and start the header exchange service under [full](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/full.go) and [light](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/light.go).

Reviewer 2: Would put these as references

`NodeConfig.BlockTime` is used to configure the syncer such that it can effectively decide the outdated headers while it receives headers from the p2p network.

Both header and block sync utilizes go-header library and runs two separate exchange services (p2p header sync and p2p block sync). This distinction is mainly to serve light nodes which does not store blocks, but only headers synced from the p2p network.

### Consumption of Header Sync

The sequencer node upon successfully creating the block publishes the signed block header to p2p network using the p2p header exchange service. The full/light nodes run the header exchange service in background to receive and store the signed headers from the p2p network. Currently the full/light nodes does not consume the p2p synced headers, however in future they have utilities to perform certain checks.

## Assumptions

* The header exchange store is created by prefixing `headerEx` the main datastore.
* The genesis `ChainID` is used to create the `PubsubTopicID` in go-header. For example, for ChainID `gm`, the pubsub topic id is `/gm/header-sub/v0.0.1`. Refer to go-header specs for further details.

> * The header store must be initialized with genesis header before starting the syncer service. The genesis header can be loaded by passing the genesis header hash via `NodeConfig.TrustedHash` configuration parameter or by querying the p2p network. This imposes a time constraint that full/light nodes have to wait for the aggregator to publish the genesis header before starting the p2p header exchange service.

Reviewer 3: How long is that time constraint?

Author: as soon as the genesis header is published to p2p network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The header store must be initialized with genesis header before starting the syncer service. The genesis header can be loaded by passing the genesis header hash via `NodeConfig.TrustedHash` configuration parameter or by querying the p2p network. This imposes a time constraint that full/light nodes have to wait for the aggregator to publish the genesis header to the p2p network before starting the p2p header exchange service.
```

> # P2P Header Sync

Reviewer: Is this Header Sync or Header Exchange? 

In the code everything is referred to as Header Exchange so i think the spec should be written as Header Exchange. 

The action is performs is syncing headers over the P2P network. 
```suggestion
# Header Exchange
```

Reviewer: We decided to go with Sync over Exchange correct? I'll update my comments accordingly, but we did align that we were removing P2P since that is how the sync works, vs what it does.

Author: yes that is correct.

## Abstract

> The P2P Header Sync is a p2pP exchange service for rollkit headers that implements the [go-header](https://github.com/celestiaorg/go-header) interface. The main components are listed in the table below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Header Exchange is a p2p exchange service for rollkit headers that implements the [go-header][go-header] interface. The main components are listed in the table below.
```

| Component  | Description                                                                                                                                                                |

> | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

Reviewer: you don't need to match the width of the column, it will auto size, you just need 3 dashes

https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#tables

```suggestion
| --- | --- |
```

| store      | a `headerEx` prefixed datastore where synced headers are stored                                                                                                          |

> | subscriber | a libp2p node pubsub subscriber                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: we should add datastore and lilp2p to references.

| p2p server | a server for handling header requests between peers in the p2p network                                                                                                     |
| exchange   | a client that enables sending in/out-bound header requests from/to the p2p network                                                                                         |
| syncer     | a service for efficient synchronization for headers. When a p2p node falls behind and wants to catch up to the latest network head via p2p network, it can use the syncer. |

## Details

> All three types of nodes (sequencer, full, and light) run the P2P header exchange service to maintain the cannonical view of the rollup chain (with respect to the p2p network).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All three types of nodes (sequencer, full, and light) run the p2p header exchange service to maintain the cannonical view of the rollup chain (with respect to the p2p network).
```

> The header exchange service inherits the ConnectionGater from the node's p2p client which allows blocking and allowing peers as needed by specifying the `P2PConfig.BlockedPeers` and `P2PConfig.AllowedPeers`.

Reviewer: nit allows --> enables or controls to make it a little easier to read with allowing being what it allows. 

```suggestion
The header exchange service inherits the `ConnectionGater` from the node's p2p client which enables blocking and allowing peers as needed by specifying the `P2PConfig.BlockedPeers` and `P2PConfig.AllowedPeers`.
```

`NodeConfig.BlockTime` is used to configure the syncer such that it can effectively decide the outdated headers while it receives headers from the p2p network.

> Both header and block sync utilizes go-header library and runs two separate exchange services (p2p header sync and p2p block sync). This distinction is mainly to serve light nodes which does not store blocks, but only headers synced from the p2p network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both header and block sync utilizes [go-header][go-header] library and runs two separate exchange services, for the headers and blocks. This distinction is mainly to serve light nodes which do not store blocks, but only headers synced from the p2p network.
```

> ### Consumption of Header Sync

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Consumption of Header Exchange
```

> The sequencer node upon successfully creating the block publishes the signed block header to p2p network using the p2p header exchange service. The full/light nodes run the header exchange service in background to receive and store the signed headers from the p2p network. Currently the full/light nodes does not consume the p2p synced headers, however in future they have utilities to perform certain checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sequencer node, upon successfully creating the block, publishes the signed block header to the p2p network using the p2p header exchange service. The full/light nodes run the header exchange service in the background to receive and store the signed headers from the p2p network. Currently the full/light nodes do not consume the p2p synced headers, however they have utilities to perform certain checks.
```

## Assumptions

* The header exchange store is created by prefixing `headerEx` the main datastore.

> * The genesis `ChainID` is used to create the `PubsubTopicID` in go-header. For example, for ChainID `gm`, the pubsub topic id is `/gm/header-sub/v0.0.1`. Refer to go-header specs for further details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The genesis `ChainID` is used to create the `PubsubTopicID` in [go-header][go-header]. For example, for ChainID `gm`, the pubsub topic id is `/gm/header-sub/v0.0.1`. Refer to go-header specs for further details.
```

> * The header store must be initialized with genesis header before starting the syncer service. The genesis header can be loaded by passing the genesis header hash via `NodeConfig.TrustedHash` configuration parameter or by querying the p2p network. This imposes a time constraint that full/light nodes have to wait for the aggregator to publish the genesis header to the p2p network before starting the p2p header exchange service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The header store must be initialized with genesis header before starting the syncer service. The genesis header can be loaded by passing the genesis header hash via `NodeConfig.TrustedHash` configuration parameter or by querying the p2p network. This imposes a time constraint that full/light nodes have to wait for the sequencer to publish the genesis header to the p2p network before starting the p2p header exchange service.
```

> * The P2P Header sync works only when the node is connected to p2p network by specifying the initial seeds to connect to via `P2PConfig.Seeds` configuration parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Header Exchange works only when the node is connected to the p2p network by specifying the initial seeds to connect to via the `P2PConfig.Seeds` configuration parameter.
```

> * Node's context is passed down to all the components of the p2p header exchange to control shutting down the service either abruptly (in case of failure) or gracefully (during successful scenarios).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The node's context is passed down to all the components of the p2p header exchange to control shutting down the service either abruptly (in case of failure) or gracefully (during successful scenarios).
```

## Implementation

> The P2P header exchange implementation can be found in [node/header_exchange.go](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/header_exchange.go). The full and light nodes create and start the header exchange service under [full](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/full.go) and [light](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/light.go).
> 
> ## References
> 
> [1] <https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/header_exchange.go>
> 
> [2] <https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/full.go>
> 
> [3] <https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/light.go>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The header exchange implementation can be found in [node/header_exchange.go][header exchange]. The full and light nodes create and start the header exchange service under [full][fullnode] and [light][lightnode].

## References

[1] [Header Exchange][header exchange]

[2] [Full Node][fullnode]

[3] [Light Node][lightnode]

[4] [go-header][go-header]

[header exchange]: https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/header_exchange.go
[fullnode]: https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/full.go
[lightnode]: https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/node/light.go
[go-header]: https://github.com/celestiaorg/go-header
```

# Header Sync

## Abstract

The nodes in the P2P network sync headers using the header sync service that implements the [go-header][go-header] interface. The header sync service consists of several components as listed below.

|Component|Description|
|---|---|
|store| a `headerEx` prefixed [datastore][datastore] where synced headers are stored|
|subscriber | a [libp2p][libp2p] node pubsub subscriber|
|p2p server| a server for handling header requests between peers in the p2p network|
|exchange| a client that enables sending in/out-bound header requests from/to the p2p network|
|syncer| a service for efficient synchronization for headers. When a p2p node falls behind and wants to catch up to the latest network head via p2p network, it can use the syncer.|

## Details

> All three types of nodes (sequencer, full, and light) run the header sync service to maintain the cannonical view of the rollup chain (with respect to the p2p network).

Reviewer: nit: P2P should be capitalized everywhere.

## Abstract

The nodes in the P2P network sync headers using the header sync service that implements the [go-header][go-header] interface. The header sync service consists of several components as listed below.

| Component  | Description                                                                                                                                                                |
| --- | --- |
| store      | a `headerEx` prefixed [datastore][datastore] where synced headers are stored                                                                                                          |
| subscriber | a [libp2p][libp2p] node pubsub subscriber                                                                                                                                            |
| p2p server | a server for handling header requests between peers in the p2p network                                                                                                     |
| exchange   | a client that enables sending in/out-bound header requests from/to the p2p network                                                                                         |

> | syncer     | a service for efficient synchronization for headers. When a p2p node falls behind and wants to catch up to the latest network head via p2p network, it can use the syncer. |

Reviewer: You don't need all the extra spaces, the tables auto size to the largest row. I'd remove the spaces.

https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#tables
